<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops"
	epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0"
	xml:lang="en-GB">

<head>
	<title>Endnotes</title>
</head>

<body epub:type="backmatter">
	<section id="endnotes" epub:type="endnotes">
		<h2 epub:type="title">Endnotes</h2>
		<ol>

			<li id="note-1" epub:type="endnote">
				<p>
If this genealogy is compared with that given by St Luke (<a href="luke.xhtml#lk-3-23">3:23 and following</a>), it is clear that one at least of the two Evangelists must have reckoned descent by adoption as sufficient to make our Lord the legal inheritor of Abraham’s blessing and of David’s Kingdom. 
It is therefore not surprising that both have traced his ancestry through his foster-father. 
It is a common opinion, derived from the Fathers, that St Joseph and the Blessed Virgin were closely related. <a href="matthew.xhtml#noteref-1" epub:type="backlink"> ↩ </a>
				</p>
			</li>

			<li id="note-2" epub:type="endnote">
				<p>
<a href="isaias.xhtml#is-7-10">Isaias 7:14</a>. ‘The virgin’ is a literal translation of the Hebrew; ‘a virgin’ would equally express the sense of the original prophecy. <a href="matthew.xhtml#noteref-2" epub:type="backlink"> ↩ </a>
				</p>
			</li>

			<li id="note-3" epub:type="endnote">
				<p>
The text here is more literally rendered ‘he knew her not until she bore a son’; but the Hebrew word represented by ‘until’ does not imply that the event which might have been expected did take place afterwards (Confer <a href="genesis.xhtml#gn-8">Genesis 8:7</a>, <a href="palms.xhtml#ps-109">Psalms 109:2</a>, <a href="daniel.xhtml#dn-6-16">Daniel 6:24</a>, <a href="i-machabees#i-m-5-21">I Machabees 5:54</a>.). 
So that this phrase does not impugn the perpetual virginity of our Lady. 
Nor is any such inference to be drawn when our Lord is called her ‘first-born’ Son, which refers to his position as redeemable under the old law (<a href="luke.xhtml#lk-2-22">Luke 2:23</a>). <a href="matthew.xhtml#noteref-3" epub:type="backlink"> ↩ </a>
				</p>
			</li>

			<li id="note-4" epub:type="endnote">
				<p>
<a href="michaeas.xhtml#mi-5">Michaeas 5:2</a>. <a href="matthew.xhtml#noteref-4" epub:type="backlink"> ↩ </a>
				</p>
			</li>

			<li id="note-5" epub:type="endnote">
				<p>
<a href="osee.xhtml#ho-11">Osee 11:1</a>. <a href="matthew.xhtml#noteref-5" epub:type="backlink"> ↩ </a>
				</p>
			</li>

			<li id="note-6" epub:type="endnote">
				<p>
<a href="jeremias.xhtml#jr-30">Jeremias 31:15</a>. <a href="matthew.xhtml#noteref-6" epub:type="backlink"> ↩ </a>
				</p>
			</li>

			<li id="note-7" epub:type="endnote">
				<p>
No such prophecy has survived to us. 
But an obscure village is often regarded by its more important neighbours as typical of an unfashionable or provincial outlook; confer <a href="john.xhtml#jn-1-35">John 1:46</a>. 
The prophecy (<a href="isaias.xhtml#is-52-13">Isaias 53:3</a>) that our Lord would be despised by men was fulfilled when his contemporaries spoke of him scornfully as “a prophet from Nazareth” (like our ‘wise men of Gotham’). 
Some think the word should be, not Nazarene, but Nazirite; confer <a href="genesis.xhtml#gn-49">Genesis 49:26</a>. <a href="matthew.xhtml#noteref-7" epub:type="backlink"> ↩ </a>
				</p>
			</li>

			<li id="note-8" epub:type="endnote">
				<p>
<a href="isaias.xhtml#is-40">Isaias 40:3</a>. <a href="matthew.xhtml#noteref-8" epub:type="backlink"> ↩ </a>
				</p>
			</li>

			<li id="note-9" epub:type="endnote">
				<p>
The baptism of John did not confer sanctifying grace; confer <a href="acts.xhtml#ac-19">Acts 19:1–6</a>. <a href="matthew.xhtml#noteref-9" epub:type="backlink"> ↩ </a>
				</p>
			</li>

			<li id="note-10" epub:type="endnote">
				<p>
<a href="deuteronomy.xhtml#dt-8">Deuteronomy 8:3</a>. <a href="matthew.xhtml#noteref-10" epub:type="backlink"> ↩ </a>
				</p>
			</li>

			<li id="note-11" epub:type="endnote">
				<p>
<a href="deuteronomy.xhtml#dt-6-14">Deuteronomy 6:16</a>. 
If our Lord had consented to cast himself down, he would have been testing God’s loving care of him (‘tempting Providence’, as we say) by putting himself deliberately in danger. <a href="matthew.xhtml#noteref-11" epub:type="backlink"> ↩ </a>
				</p>
			</li>

			<li id="note-12" epub:type="endnote">
				<p>
<a href="deuteronomy.xhtml#dt-5-32">Deuteronomy 6:13</a>. <a href="matthew.xhtml#noteref-12" epub:type="backlink"> ↩ </a>
				</p>
			</li>

			<li id="note-13" epub:type="endnote">
				<p>
<a href="isaias.xhtml#is-9">Isaias 9:1–2</a>. <a href="matthew.xhtml#noteref-13" epub:type="backlink"> ↩ </a>
				</p>
			</li>

			<li id="note-14" epub:type="endnote">
				<p>
<a href="exodus.xhtml#ex-20">Exodus 20:13</a>. <a href="matthew.xhtml#noteref-14" epub:type="backlink"> ↩ </a>
				</p>
			</li>

			<li id="note-15" epub:type="endnote">
				<p>
<a href="deuteronomy.xhtml#dt-24">Deuteronomy 24:1</a>. 
By the law of Moses, a husband might not turn his wife out of doors without giving her a certificate of freedom, which showed that he had no further claim on her. 
Even so, our Lord teaches, the husband’s behaviour is selfish, since the dismissed wife would be tempted to remarry, and thus become, in God’s sight, an adulteress. 
The Greek word here translated ‘setting aside’ has commonly been taken as meaning ‘unless she is unfaithful’, but it can also be interpreted as meaning ‘whether she is unfaithful or not’. See further <a href="matthew.xhtml#mt-19">Matthew 19.7–9</a>, and p. 20, note 1. TODO <a href="matthew.xhtml#noteref-15" epub:type="backlink"> ↩ </a>
				</p>
			</li>

			<li id="note-16" epub:type="endnote">
				<p>
Our Lord here condemns those Pharisaical evasions, which might make it lawful to perjure oneself as long as the oath was not taken directly in the name of God. Confer <a href="matthew.xhtml#mt-23-13">Matthew 23:16–22</a>. <a href="matthew.xhtml#noteref-16" epub:type="backlink"> ↩ </a>
				</p>
			</li>

			<li id="note-17" epub:type="endnote">
				<p>
<a href="exodus.xhtml#ex-21-18">Exodus 21:24</a>; <a href="leviticus.xhtml#lv-24-10">Leviticus 24:20</a>; <a href="deuteronomy.xhtml#dt-19-21">Deuteronomy 19:21</a>. <a href="matthew.xhtml#noteref-17" epub:type="backlink"> ↩ </a>
				</p>
			</li>

			<li id="note-18" epub:type="endnote">
				<p>
<a href="leviticus.xhtml#lv-19">Leviticus 19:18</a>; where, however, nothing is said about hating enemies. This must have been a gloss put upon the text of the commandment. <a href="matthew.xhtml#noteref-18" epub:type="backlink"> ↩ </a>
				</p>
			</li>

			<li id="note-19" epub:type="endnote">
				<p>
The very rare verb which our Lord uses here probably means to ‘stammer’, to ‘hesitate’. 
The heathens used to address their gods by a series of titles, with the superstitious idea that the prayer would not be heard unless the right title was hit upon. <a href="matthew.xhtml#noteref-19" epub:type="backlink"> ↩ </a>
				</p>
			</li>

			<li id="note-20" epub:type="endnote">
				<p>
‘Daily’: the Latin here (but not in <a href="luke.xhtml#lk-11">Luke 11:3</a>) coins the word <em>supersubstantialis</em>, which has sometimes been understood as a direct reference to the Holy Eucharist. <a href="matthew.xhtml#noteref-20" epub:type="backlink"> ↩ </a>
				</p>
			</li>

			<li id="note-21" epub:type="endnote">
				<p>
‘Height’; the Greek word here used can also mean ‘length of life’; and some have thought that ‘cubit’ is used, by a metaphor, for a short space of time. <a href="matthew.xhtml#noteref-21" epub:type="backlink"> ↩ </a>
				</p>
			</li>

			<li id="note-22" epub:type="endnote">
				<p>
<a href="leviticus.xhtml#lv-14">Leviticus 14:2</a>. <a href="matthew.xhtml#noteref-22" epub:type="backlink"> ↩ </a>
				</p>
			</li>

			<li id="note-23" epub:type="endnote">
				<p>
<a href="isaias.xhtml#is-52-13">Isaias 53:4</a>. <a href="matthew.xhtml#noteref-23" epub:type="backlink"> ↩ </a>
				</p>
			</li>

			<li id="note-24" epub:type="endnote">
				<p>
Some think that the father was still alive, and the son wanted to defer his following of Christ until his father’s death. 
Our Lord’s answer is perhaps simply meant to imply that true life can only be found in following him. <a href="matthew.xhtml#noteref-24" epub:type="backlink"> ↩ </a>
				</p>
			</li>

			<li id="note-25" epub:type="endnote">
				<p>
Only St Matthew mentions the second demoniac, who may have been a woman. <a href="matthew.xhtml#noteref-25" epub:type="backlink"> ↩ </a>
				</p>
			</li>

			<li id="note-26" epub:type="endnote">
				<p>
‘Is more lightly given’, in the sense that one who falsely claims to cure disease will (unlike the pretender to spiritual powers) be exposed by failure. <a href="matthew.xhtml#noteref-26" epub:type="backlink"> ↩ </a>
				</p>
			</li>

			<li id="note-27" epub:type="endnote">
				<p>
<a href="osee.xhtml#ho-6">Osee 6:6</a>. <a href="matthew.xhtml#noteref-27" epub:type="backlink"> ↩ </a>
				</p>
			</li>

			<li id="note-28" epub:type="endnote">
				<p>
‘All its pattern’, this is probably the sense of the Latin; the Greek has, ‘the new piece draws away threads from the old’. <a href="matthew.xhtml#noteref-28" epub:type="backlink"> ↩ </a>
				</p>
			</li>

			<li id="note-29" epub:type="endnote">
				<p>
It seems likely that St Matthew has here combined two separate appeals made by the ruler of the synagogue. <a href="matthew.xhtml#noteref-29" epub:type="backlink"> ↩ </a>
				</p>
			</li>




			<li id="note-X" epub:type="endnote">
				<p>

<a href="matthew.xhtml#noteref-X" epub:type="backlink"> ↩ </a>
				</p>
			</li>



		</ol>

	</section>
</body>
</html>